COSC 4377 Notes 

We can describe the internet as a "network of networks"; that is, a networking infrastructure that provides services to 
to distributed applications.

The internet is a computer network that interconnects hundreds of millions of computing devices throughout the world. Not to long
ago, these devices were primarily traditional desktop PCs, Linux workstations, and so-called servers that store and transmit information such as Web pages and e-mail messages. In internet jargon, all of these devices are called "hosts" or "end systems". 

As of July 2008, there were nearly 600 million "end-systems" (hosts) attached to the Internet.

"End systems" are connected together by a network of "communication links" and "packet switches". We will see later in chapter 1, that there are many types of "communication links", which are made up of different types of physical media, including coaxial cable, coopper wire, fiber optics, and radio spectrum. Different "communication links" can transmit data at diffeent rates, with the "transmission rate" of a "communication link" measured in bits/seconds.

When one "end system" has data to send to another end system, the sending end system segments the data and adds "header bytes" to each segment. The resulting package of information, known as "packets" in the jargon of computer networks, are then sent through the network to the destination end system, where they are reassembled into the original data. A "packet switch" takes a packet arriving on one of its incoming communication links and forwards that packet on one of its outgoing "communication links".

"Packet switches" come in many shapes and flavors, bu the two most prominent types in today's Internet are "routers" and "link-layer switches". Both types of switches forward packets toward their ultimate destinations. "Link-layer switches" are typically used in access networks, while routers are typically used in the network core. 

The sequence of "communication-links" and "packet switches" traversed by a packet from the sending end system to the receiving end system is known as a "route" or "path" through the network.

The exact amount of traffic being carried in the Internet is difficult to estimate. PriMetrica estimates that 10 terabits per second of international capacity was used by public Internet providers in 2008, and that capacity doubles approximately every two years.

"Packet-switched networks" (which transport packets) are in many ways similar to transportation network of highways, roads, and intersections (which transport vehicles). 

"End systems" access the Internet through Internet Service Providers (ISPs), including "residential ISPs" such as local cable or telephone companies; "corporate ISPs"; "univeristy ISPs"; and ISPs that provide WiFi access in airports, hotels, coffee shops, and other public places. Each ISP is in itself a network of "packet switches" and "communication links". ISPs provide a variety of types of network accesses to the "end systems", including 56 kbps dial-ups modem access, residential broadband access such as cable modem or DSL, highspeed local-area network access, and wireless access. 

ISPs also provide Internet access to content providers, connecting Web sites directly to the Internet. The internet is all about connecting "end systems" to each other, so the ISPs that provide access to these "end systems" must also be interconnected. These lower-tier ISPs are interconnected through national and international upper-tier ISPs such as AT&T and Sprint. 

An upper-tier ISP consists of highspeed "routers" interconnected with highspeed "fiber-optic links" (communication links). Each ISP network, whether upper-tier or lower-tier, is managed independently, runs the IP protocol, and conforms to certain naming and address conventions.

"End systems", "packet-switches", and other pieces of the Internet run protocols that control the sending and receiving of information witin the Internet. The "Transmission Control Protocol" (TCP) and the "Internet Protocol" (IP) are two of the most important protocols in the Internet.

The "IP" protocol specifies the format of the packets that are sent and received among "routers" (packet-switches) and "end-systems".

The Internet's principal protocols are collectively known as TCP/IP.

Given the importance of protocols to the Internet, it's important that everone agree on what each and every protocol does. This is where standards come into play. "Internet Standards" are developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). The IETF standards documents are called "requests for comments" (RFCs). RFCs started out as general requests for comments (hence the name) to resolve network and protocol design problems that faced the precursor to the Internet. 